# [PEP 327 -- Decimal Data Type - Python.org](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0327/)

## Abstract

The idea is to have a Decimal data type, 
for every use where decimals are needed but binary floating point is too inexact.

    Decimal : 十進固定及び浮動小数点数
    Binary Floating Point: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/30711/definitions#definitions

The Decimal data type will support the Python standard functions and operations,
and must comply with the decimal arithmetic ANSI standard X3.274-1996 [1].

    [1] ANSI standard X3.274-1996 (Programming Language REXX): http://www.rexxla.org/Standards/ansi.html

Decimal will be floating point (as opposed to fixed point)
and will have bounded precision (the precision is the upper limit on the number of significant digits in a result). 
However, precision is user-settable, 
and a notion of significant trailing zeroes is supported so that fixed-point usage is also possible.

This work is based on code and test functions written by Eric Price, Aahz and Tim Peters. Just before Python 2.4a1, the decimal.py reference implementation was moved into the standard library; 
along with the documentation and the test suite, 
this was the work of Raymond Hettinger. 
Much of the explanation in this PEP is taken from Cowlishaw's work [2], comp.lang.python and python-dev.

    [2] ANSI standard X3.274-1996 (Programming Language REXX): http://www.rexxla.org/Standards/ansi.html

## Motivation

Here I'll expose the reasons of why I think a Decimal data type is needed 
and why other numeric data types are not enough.

I wanted a Money data type, 
and after proposing a pre-PEP in comp.lang.python, 
the community agreed to have a numeric data type with the needed arithmetic behaviour, 
and then build Money over it: 
all the considerations about quantity of digits after the decimal point, rounding, etc., will be handled through Money. It is not the purpose of this PEP to have a data type that can be used as Money without further effort.

One of the biggest advantages of implementing a standard is that someone already thought out all the creepy cases for you. And to a standard GvR redirected me: Mike Cowlishaw's General Decimal Arithmetic specification [2]. This document defines a general purpose decimal arithmetic. A correct implementation of this specification will conform to the decimal arithmetic defined in ANSI/IEEE standard 854-1987, except for some minor restrictions, and will also provide unrounded decimal arithmetic and integer arithmetic as proper subsets.

### The problem with binary float

In decimal math, there are many numbers that can't be represented with a fixed number of decimal digits, e.g. 1/3 = 0.3333333333.......

In base 2 (the way that standard floating point is calculated), 1/2 = 0.1, 1/4 = 0.01, 1/8 = 0.001, etc. Decimal 0.2 equals 2/10 equals 1/5, resulting in the binary fractional number 0.001100110011001... As you can see, the problem is that some decimal numbers can't be represented exactly in binary, resulting in small roundoff errors.

So we need a decimal data type that represents exactly decimal numbers. Instead of a binary data type, we need a decimal one.

### Why floating point?

So we go to decimal, but why floating point?

Floating point numbers use a fixed quantity of digits (precision) to represent a number, working with an exponent when the number gets too big or too small. For example, with a precision of 5:

~~~py
  1234 ==>   1234e0
 12345 ==>  12345e0
123456 ==>  12346e1
~~~

(note that in the last line the number got rounded to fit in five digits).

In contrast, we have the example of a long integer with infinite precision, meaning that you can have the number as big as you want, and you'll never lose any information.

In a fixed point number, the position of the decimal point is fixed. For a fixed point data type, check Tim Peter's FixedPoint at SourceForge [4]. I'll go for floating point because it's easier to implement the arithmetic behaviour of the standard, and then you can implement a fixed point data type over Decimal.

But why can't we have a floating point number with infinite precision? It's not so easy, because of inexact divisions. E.g.: 1/3 = 0.3333333333333... ad infinitum. In this case you should store a infinite amount of 3s, which takes too much memory, ;).

John Roth proposed to eliminate the division operator and force the user to use an explicit method, just to avoid this kind of trouble. This generated adverse reactions in comp.lang.python, as everybody wants to have support for the / operator in a numeric data type.

With this exposed maybe you're thinking "Hey! Can we just store the 1 and the 3 as numerator and denominator?", which takes us to the next point.

## Why not rational?

Rational numbers(有理数) are stored using two integer numbers, 
the numerator(分子) and the denominator(分母). 
This implies that the arithmetic operations can't be executed directly 
(e.g. to add two rational numbers you first need to calculate the common denominator).

Quoting Alex Martelli:

    The performance implications of the fact that summing two rationals (which take O(M) and O(N) space respectively) gives a rational which takes O(M+N) memory space is just too troublesome. There are excellent Rational implementations in both pure Python and as extensions (e.g., gmpy), but they'll always be a "niche market" IMHO. Probably worth PEPping, not worth doing without Decimal -- which is the right way to represent sums of money, a truly major use case in the real world.

Anyway, if you're interested in this data type, 
you maybe will want to take a look at [PEP 239: Adding a Rational Type to Python](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0239/).


## So, what do we have?

The result is a Decimal data type, with bounded precision and floating point.

Will it be useful? I can't say it better than Alex Martelli:

    Python (out of the box) doesn't let you have binary floating point numbers with whatever precision you specify: you're limited to what your hardware supplies. Decimal, be it used as a fixed or floating point number, should suffer from no such limitation: whatever bounded precision you may specify on number creation (your memory permitting) should work just as well. Most of the expense of programming simplicity can be hidden from application programs and placed in a suitable decimal arithmetic type. As per http://speleotrove.com/decimal/, a single data type can be used for integer, fixed-point, and floating-point decimal arithmetic -- and for money arithmetic which doesn't drive the application programmer crazy.

There are several uses for such a data type. As I said before, I will use it as base for Money. In this case the bounded precision is not an issue; quoting Tim Peters:


    A precision of 20 would be way more than enough to account for total world economic output, down to the penny, since the beginning of time.

## General Decimal Arithmetic Specification

Here I'll include information and descriptions that are part of the specification [2] (the structure of the number, the context, etc.). All the requirements included in this section are not for discussion (barring typos or other mistakes), as they are in the standard, and the PEP is just for implementing the standard.

Because of copyright restrictions, I can not copy here explanations taken from the specification, so I'll try to explain it in my own words. I firmly encourage you to read the original specification document [2] for details or if you have any doubt.



## 関連

- [PEP 498 -- Literal String Interpolation - Python.org](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0498/)
